Prepare changelogs for the 3.3.2 release (#11368)
tarantool/tarantool: changelogs/3.3.2.md

# 3.3.2

Date: 2025-04-10
Tag: 3.3.2

## Overview

Tarantool 3.x is the recommended release series. Users of Tarantool 2.11 are
encouraged to update to the latest 3.x release.

> This release introduces 4 improvements and resolves 46 bugs since 3.3.1.

Reviewer: We shouldn't add features into bugfix releases. We allow tooling improvements, sure, but let's advertise it differently from tarantool features.

I propose to drop 'introduces 4 improvements' from the overview, move the tooling section to the bottom, make it the second-level section 'tools' instead of 'feature/tools'. We can even merge it into the 'bugfix/tools', because these changes don't look very different by its sense.

To sum up: it shouldn't look like we introduce features in a bugfix release.

Author: I had similar reasoning to yours, but decided to leave it under "Functionality added or changed" section.

But ok, I don't mind moving it to bugfixes

Author: Resolving, the fix is applied: https://github.com/tarantool/tarantool/pull/11368#issuecomment-2794966184

values as C-language doubles, even when actual integers are stored. This works
fine for small numbers, but starting from 2^53 the double-style comparison
loses precision. For example, 18446744073709551615 and 18446744073709551614
would be considered the same values.

Besides, point-lookups in such index are going to be broken by design too -
looking up by 18446744073709551615 can return 18446744073709551614 and many
other integers around this point.

Unfortunately, even if the user doesn't have the `double` type in any vinyl
indexes, but **ever had it before**, it is still unsafe. A `double` index
altered to `number` or `scalar` would remain broken. It is **very important that
users rebuild all the vinyl indexes that have or ever had the `double` field
type in them**. What is worse, just an alter `double` -> `number` **won't
work**. The old index must be dropped and a new one must be created. In any
order. See also gh-9965 and gh-11017 for more details.

Please, consider the full list of user-visible changes below.

## Compatibility

Tarantool 2.x and 3.x are compatible in the binary data layout, client-server

> protocol, and replication protocol. It means that the updating may be performed

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
protocol, and replication protocol. It means that an upgrade may be performed
```

with zero downtime for read requests and the-order-of-network-lag downtime for
write requests.

Please, follow the [upgrade procedure][upgrade] to plan your update actions.

Users of Tarantool 2.x may be interested in the [compat][compat] options that
allow to imitate some 2.x behavior. This allows to perform application code
update step-by-step, not all-at-once.

[compat]: https://www.tarantool.io/en/doc/latest/reference/configuration/configuration_reference/#compat

[upgrade]: https://www.tarantool.io/en/doc/latest/book/admin/upgrades/

## Functionality added or changed

### Tools

Made LuaJIT profilers more user-friendly:

> * `misc.memprof.start()` without arguments writes the dump into the default file

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `misc.memprof.start()` without arguments writes a dump into a default file
```

  named `memprof.bin` instead of raising an error.
* `misc.sysprof.start()` provides more verbose errors in case of profiler
  misuse.
* If the profiler is disabled for the target platform, it is now mentioned in
  the error message explicitly.
* `misc.sysprof.start()` without arguments starts the profiler in the default
  mode `"D"`.

## Bugs fixed

### Core

* Fixed a bug when the `sequence:reset()` call result was not recovered
  after the server restart (gh-9871).
* Fixed log message being truncated to 1024 bytes with JSON logger (gh-10918).

> * Fixed several bugs in the numbers comparison and hashing in tuple keys. It

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Fixed several bugs related to numbers comparison and hashing in tuple keys. It
```

  allowed to insert the same key multiple times into a unique index, and
  sometimes wouldn't allow to find an existing key in an index. Could happen
  when numbers were encoded in MessagePack suboptimally and when the `double`
  field type was used (gh-9965).
* Fixed the issue with hanging write operations forever triggered by heavy
  write load and WAL writing failures on cascade rollback (gh-11081).
* Fixed a bug when cancelling a fiber waiting in WAL queue corrupted the
  the WAL (gh-11078).
* Fixed a bug when the timestamps of snapshots created before the server restart
  were not taken into account with `checkpoint_interval` enabled (gh-9820).
* Fixed a bug when the sizes of xlog files created before the server restart
  were not taken into account during the `checkpoint_wal_threshold` exceedance
  checks (gh-9811).
* Fixed a bug when transactions in the WAL queue were not rolled back on WAL
  error (gh-11179).

> * Fixed a bug when WAL queue was not flushed properly. In particular
>   when building index of vinyl space. In the latter case it may lead
>   the new index missing data from transactions in the queue

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Fixed a bug when the WAL queue was not flushed properly. In particular
  when building an index of a vinyl space. In the latter case it might make
  the new index miss data from transactions in the queue
```

  (gh-11118, gh-11119).
* Fixed a bug when a record could be lost from the `_gc_consumers` space after
  receiving a promote request from another instance and restarting the current
  instance (gh-11053).
* Fixed a bug when `box.commit({wait = 'none'})` could yield (gh-11224).

### Memtx

* Fixed a crash when memtx MVCC tried to abort an already committed
  non-memtx transaction if it used a system space view or tried to
  perform a DDL operation (gh-10715).
* Fixed a bug when Tarantool with memtx MVCC enabled was aborted on
  workload with many `index:get()` operations reading nothing (gh-11022).

> * Fixed a crash on OOM on insertion in tree index of memtx engine (gh-11326).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Fixed a crash on OOM on insertion in tree indexes of the memtx engine (gh-11326).
```

  a compaction failure with a "No such file or directory" error (gh-11163).
* Fixed a bug when `space:truncate()` failed with `ER_TRANSACTION_YIELD`
  (gh-11249).

### Replication

* Fixed a crash which could happen while an instance was shut down
  having an unfinished synchronous transaction (gh-10766).
* Fixed a bug when the synchronous queue size limit was not enabled
  after recovering from local snapshot-files, i.e. its size was not limited by
  `replication_synchro_queue_max_size` (gh-11091).
* Fixed a crash which could happen during relay thread shut down (gh-9920).

### LuaJIT

Backported patches from the vanilla LuaJIT trunk (gh-10709, gh-11055). The
following issues were fixed as part of this activity:

* Fixed compilation of `getmetatable()` for `io` objects.
* Fixed dirty reads from recorded `IR_NOP`.
* Fixed fusing optimization across `table.clear()` or insertion of a new key.
* Disabled FMA optimization on aarch64 to avoid incorrect results in floating
  point arithmetics. Optimization may be enabled for the JIT engine via the
  command `jit.opt.start("+fma")`.
* Fixed machine code zone overflow for trace recording on x86/x64.

> * Fixed possible infinite loop during recording a chunk that uses upvalues.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Fixed possible infinite loop during recording a chunk that used upvalues.
```

* Fixed recording of `bit.bor()`/`bit.bxor()`/`bit.band()` with string
  arguments.
* Fixed parsing of `for _ in` loop.
* Fixed compiler warning in `setfenv()` / `getfenv()` with negative levels as
  the argument.
* Fixed register allocation for stores into sunk values (gh-10746).
* Fixed a crash when using a Lua C function as a vmevent handler for trace
  events.
* Fixed the compilation of `...` in `select()`.
* Fixed closing the report file without samples for `jit.p`.

> * Fixed the OOM error handling during recording of the `__concat` metamethod.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Fixed the OOM error handling during recording the `__concat` metamethod.
```

> * Fixed the second `trace.flush()` call for the already flushed trace.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Fixed the second `trace.flush()` call for an already flushed trace.
```

* Fixed bit op coercion for shifts in DUALNUM builds.
* Fixed `IR_ABC` hoisting.
* Returned the rehashing of the cdata finalizer table at the end of the GC
  cycle to avoid memory overgrowing for cdata-intensive workloads.

### Lua

* Fixed a bug when the request counter used by a `net.box` client to implement
  the graceful shutdown protocol could underflow while it was fetching the
  schema from the remote end. In case of a debug build, the bug would crash
  the client. In case of a release build, the bug would result in a timeout

>   while executing the remote server shutdown (gh-11062).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  while executing a remote server shutdown (gh-11062).
```
